We're gonna use a language that
probably isn't used before, okay?
It's actually difficult to find
a Dart developer out there that
personal experience in Flutter,
actually, okay?
Dart is a language created by Google,
okay?
So Google created Dart as an open
source language around ten years ago.
I remember being there in San Francisco
in Google IO when it was announced.
And it was kind of weird to
hear about the new language,
mostly because of why they
created the language.
So it's a statically typed language.
So compared with JavaScript, it has that
difference, means that we need to compile.
We are going to compile code and
every variable has a type,
it's not like JavaScript.
But the original intention of Dart,
was actually to replace
JavaScript in the browser.
So, that's ten years ago even
more than ten years ago.
So, I think whilst we're, unless you know,
at this point it didn't work.
So that idea of replacing JavaScript with
a new client side language didn't work.
Fortunately, I will say.
So, I remember there was
only one version of Chrome
the The Chrome Canary,
that's the alpha version.
There was one version supporting
Dart directly client side, okay?
But that idea didn't work.
But then Flutter appear a few years later.
And Google said, okay,
we have a language, let's use it.
Okay, so
now it's like the new life of Dart.
Of course,
you can do more things with Dart.
But like server code or
normal scripting, but
most of the time today,
we will use Dart with a Flutter.
So we didn't lose type inference.
We will see these in a minute.
So no worries.
It's multi-platform so it has compiler for
mostly all the platforms available today.
Easy to learn, okay?
So if you know Java or C sharp,
it's actually pretty similar
with some additions or
with some addition from other languages,
including JavaScript.
It has less ceremony.
Less bureaucracy than for
example, Java, okay?
But it's still similar to Java, okay?
It includes some other ideas
such as promises, okay?
It has a different name here.
It's called Future.
It's not 100% the same as the promise but
it's kind of the same at this point.
And it includes optional new safety.
So you can enable null-safety if you want
to and I will explain what that is if this
is the first time you're hearing
about null-safety in a minute.
So that's the idea of
Dart as a language,okay?
As I mentioned before it was
originally for internal web and
work to replace JavaScript
fortunately it didn't work.
And today to carry intention
the current target of Dart is to
create in front-end apps
including Flutter and AngularDart.
So if you're an Angular developer
you can decide to use Dart instead
of TypeScript for example, okay?
But anyway, that's not for today.
Today, we are going to
be covering Flutter.
And it's inspired by
T Java JavaScript Erlang small talk even
a little bit of Swift and Kotlin.
We will be using Dart 2,
2 point something, okay?
But that is different from dot 1.
So it's actually not compatible.
So the version that we will be using
of the language is called Dark 2,okay?
And Dart compiles into native code and
intermediate language and
even compiled to JavaScript.
And we are gonna see what
that means in a minute.
So it's actually one of
the most multi platform
languages out there because we
can actually get Dart code and
compile that into Intel 64
bits architecture, ARM.
We can also compile to a B machine
that that can be executed in different
operating system without recompiling.
And we can compiled to JavaScript
compile in quotes, right?
So we can transpire if you want.
We can get an output in JavaScript.
So then you can run in the browser.
So, we are going to be using Dart 2, and
if you wanna play with the language
without installing any compiler, okay?
You can go to dartpad.dev, they'll let
you play with Dart in the browser.
Because it can compile to JavaScript,
it's actually pretty simple to make
a Dart compiler client inside, okay?
Make sense?
So every Dart application has a main
function, so similar to C or Java.
So we are going to start
with the main function.
It has full object oriented
programming with type inference,
meaning that everything
will be an object in Dart.
So this is kind of similar to Java.
It's even more extreme than Java.
Because in Java, like an int, with
a lowercase is not actually an option.
Well here everything is an object, okay?
Everything comes from a class in Dart.
No safety is available
as an optional feature.
And actually when we are making flatter
applications today, it's enabled by
default, like a year ago, it was
actually disabled by default, no safety.
It feels easy to understand, and
it has feature for many languages,
such as Extension, Mixins, Futures that
is async programming similar to promises.
But when compiling to the web,
this is important we need to remember,
that the code is going to be executed
in the JavaScript built on machine.
With all the advantages and
disadvantages of that, okay?
So meaning that the security of our
objects might not be the same when
we are running our Dart code in
a native platform than on the web.
Because on the web everything is
being converted to JavaScript.
And we know that JavaScript sometimes
it doesn't contain hard limits for
options for example,
I can mess with the prototype of objects,
I can change the type of variable, and
transcript, the runtime will not complain.
If I have a variable defined
as in the string and
I changed the value to an integer,
who is going to complain in the browser?
No one, okay?
So, have in mind that we have those
differences when we are targeting
different platforms.
So in terms of where Dart goes, typically,
we know that we have some
languages such as JavaScript,
where we ship source code.
We have some other languages,
such as Java, where we ship bytecode.
That is an intermediate language and
then we have a built on machine.
And we have compiled languages,
such as Dart that actually
compiles into machine code, okay?
And that means that you need to compile
for every different platform like ARM,
Intel and
other architectures that you have.
And for Intel,
you have different architectures
per operating system as well.
But I already mentioned
that Dart is I do enough so
we can actually get into
the three words at the same time.
So you write Dart and
you can compile to JavaScript, so
you get an output JavaScript source
code that is not intended for
human interaction, right?
So we are not going to we touch or
develop on top of that JavaScript code.
It can compile into bytecode and
that has its own built on machine and
it isn't compiled to machine code.
Well let me tell you this when we
are building web apps actually we're
going to shape the source code.
So if you're making with Dart,
with Flutter web apps, that's our target.
If we are targeting desktop
operating systems such as Linux,
Mac OS, or Windows,
we will be shipping bytecode.
And if we are targeting iOS or Android
we're going to ship machine code directly.
We then we then need to
make this decision, okay?
This happens automatically
behind the scenes but
have that in mind the same codebase
will actually get completely
different outputs with completely
different nature, okay?
From the same codebase
you have any questions?
That's fine.
>> I was just wondering why
Windows platforms when compiled to
the machine code.
>> Actually with performance because
on desktop they can perform.
So on desktop they can perform better with
a brutal machine that it might not be so
simple.
Actually on iOS, for example,
it's forbidden to have a built on machine.
So if you're making an iOS application,
you cannot include the IBM like with
the just in time compiler is not possible.
So a technical issue, it's a commercial
issue from the Apple platform.
So I think that's the reason.
So on mobile for performance and because
of the restrictions of the app stores,
they are actually compiling to
machine code and not to the IBM.
Question on the chat?
>> Can you make command line binaries?
>> So if you wanna do binaries,
yeah, it's like in machine code.
So, you can target machine code for
different operating systems.
So, in that case you need to
pick the operating system.
And I mean if you wanna create a Linux
output and install like a CLI or
something like that, yeah it's possible.
>> Someone was asking what
did you mean by null-safety?
>> Okay, we will get into null-safety
in a minute with some examples.
But it's the ability on
a language like Dart to actually
express if we accept nulls or
not any variable.
So if you're writing Java or C sharp or
even PHP, if you create a variable,
okay, and you don't set the value to it,
it stores no, okay?
So by default it's null.
Well, actually when you have
null-safety language with null-safety,
it cannot be null unless you say so.
So, you as a developer can
actually make the decision if each
variable if you accept nulls or not.
So it had to do with
the semantics of your code, and
it will reduce the amount of
bugs that you have in your code.
So today modern languages such
as Dart ,Swift, Caitlyn ,Go and
many others are actually
supporting null-safety, okay?
And this is also coming to
other languages as well.
C sharp has also null-safety, there is
an optional way to do that as well, but
it was like something that
the others later on C Sharp, okay?
But we will see an example
of that in a minute.